Protocol RFC for collations (#3068)
delta-io/delta: protocol_rfcs/collated-string-type.md

Collations can be specified for all string fields in a table schema. It is also possible to store statistics per collation version. This is required because the min and max values of a column can differ based on the used collation or collation version.

By default, all strings are collated using binary collation. That means that strings compare equal if their binary representations are equal. The binary representation is also used to sort them.

#### Collation identifiers

Collations can be referred to using collation identifiers. The Delta format does not specify any collation rules other than binary collation, but supports the concept of collation providers such that engines can use providers like [ICU](https://icu.unicode.org/) and mark statistics accordingly.

A collation identifier consists of 3 parts, which are combined into one identifier using dots as separators. Dots are not allowed to be part of provider and collation names, but can be used in versions.

Part | Description
-|-

> Provider | Name of the provider. Must not contain dots

Author: How does it work with an optional provider when we allow dots in versions. So for example if we have

`prover.name.version` and `name2.version.1`

how do we create a parsing rule for this?

Name | Name of the collation as provided by the provider. Must not contain dots
Version | Version string. Is allowed to contain dots

#### Specifying collations in the table schema

Collations can be specified for all string types in a schema. This includes string fields, but also the key and value type of maps and the element type of arrays. Collations are specified in the metadata of the closest enclosing field.
Collation identifiers are stored in a `collations` object. These object can have 4 keys:

Key | Value | Description
-|-|-
collation | collation identifier | Collation of a string field. Only valid when none of the other keys are present.

> elementCollation | `collations object` | Collations of elements in an array. Only valid when none of the other keys are present.

Reviewer: this is not the case since we moved collation to the metadata and not an additional field, same for below

keyCollation | `collations object` | Collations for the key type of a map. Only valid on it's own or with `valueCollation`.
valueCollation | `collations object` | Collations for the value type of a map. Only valid on it's own or with `keyCollation`.

This example provides an overview of how collations are stored. Note that irrelevant fields have been stripped.

```
{
  "type" : "struct",
  "fields" : [ {
    "name" : "col1",
    "type" : "map",
    "keyType": "string"
    "valueType": {
      "type": "array"
      "elementType": {
        "type": "map"
        "keyType: {
          "type": "array"
          "elementType": "string"
        },
        "valueType": {
          "type": "map",
          "keyType": "string",
          "valueType": {
            "type": "struct",
            "fields": [ {
              "name": "f1"
              "type": "string"      
            } ],
          },
          metadata: {

>             "collations": { "collation": "ICU.de_DE.73" }

Reviewer: why is version in the schema?

also I think we agreed to a slightly different metadata format: https://github.com/apache/spark/pull/46280

# Collated String Type
**Associated Github issue for discussions: https://github.com/delta-io/delta/issues/2894**

This protocol change adds support for collated strings. It consists of three changes to the protocol

* Collations in the table schema

> * Collated AddFile statistics

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Per-column statistics are annotated with the collation that was used to collect them
```

* Domain metadata with active collation version

--------

> ***Add a new section in front of the [Primitive Types](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#primitive-types) section.***

### Collations table feature

> Collations are a set of rules for how strings are compared. The are supported by the `collations` table feature. Collations do not affect how strings are stored. Collations are applied when comparing strings for equality or to determine the sort order of two strings. Case insensitive comparison is one example of a collation where case is ignored when string are compared for equality and the lower cased variant of a string is used to determine its sort order.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collations are a set of rules for how strings are compared. They are supported by the `collations` table feature. Collations do not affect how strings are stored. Collations are applied when comparing strings for equality or to determine the sort order of two strings. Case insensitive comparison is one example of a collation where case is ignored when string are compared for equality and the lower cased variant of a string is used to determine its sort order.
```

> Collations can be specified for all string fields in a table schema. It is also possible to store statistics per collation version. This is required because the min and max values of a column can differ based on the used collation or collation version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each string field can have a collation, which is specified in the table schema. It is also possible to store statistics per collation version. This is required because the min and max values of a column can differ based on the used collation or collation version.
```

By default, all strings are collated using binary collation. That means that strings compare equal if their binary representations are equal. The binary representation is also used to sort them.

The `collations` table feature is a writer only feature and allows clients that do not support collations to read the table using binary collation.

#### Collation identifiers

Collations can be referred to using collation identifiers. The Delta format does not specify any collation rules other than binary collation, but supports the concept of collation providers such that engines can use providers like [ICU](https://icu.unicode.org/) and mark statistics accordingly.

A collation identifier consists of 3 parts, which are combined into one identifier using dots as separators. Dots are not allowed to be part of provider and collation names, but can be used in versions.

Part | Description
-|-
Provider | Name of the provider. Must not contain dots
Name | Name of the collation as provided by the provider. Must not contain dots
Version | Version string. Is allowed to contain dots. This part is optional.

#### Specifying collations in the table schema

> Collations can be specified for all string types in a schema. This includes string fields, but also the key and value type of maps and the element type of arrays. Collations are stored in the `__COLLATIONS` key of the metadata of the nearest ancestor [StructField](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#struct-field) of the Delta table schema. Nested maps and arrays are encoded the same way as ids in [IcebergCompatV2](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#writer-requirements-for-icebergcompatv2). Collation identifiers are stored without key because the version of a collation is not enforced for reading.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Collations can be specified for any string types in a schema. This includes string fields, but also the key and value type of maps and the element type of arrays. Collations are stored in the `__COLLATIONS` key of the metadata of the nearest ancestor [StructField](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#struct-field) of the Delta table schema. Nested maps and arrays are encoded the same way as ids in [IcebergCompatV2](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#writer-requirements-for-icebergcompatv2). Collation identifiers are stored without key because the version of a collation is not enforced for reading.
```

This example provides an overview of how collations are stored in the schema. Note that irrelevant fields have been stripped.

Example schema

```

> |-- col1: map

Reviewer 2: I think it will be useful to include a column with a non-complex type.

* Domain metadata with active collation version

--------

> ***Add a new section in front of the [Primitive Types](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#primitive-types) section.***

### Collations table feature

Collations are a set of rules for how strings are compared. They are supported by the `collations` table feature. Collations do not affect how strings are stored. Collations are applied when comparing strings for equality or to determine the sort order of two strings. Case insensitive comparison is one example of a collation where case is ignored when string are compared for equality and the lower cased variant of a string is used to determine its sort order.

Each string field can have a collation, which is specified in the table schema. It is also possible to store statistics per collation version. This is required because the min and max values of a column can differ based on the used collation or collation version.

By default, all strings are collated using binary collation. That means that strings compare equal if their binary representations are equal. The binary representation is also used to sort them.

> The `collations` table feature is a writer only feature and allows clients that do not support collations to read the table using binary collation.

Reviewer 3: Can we specify the reader and writer requirements? Just like how we do it for the existing table features in the protocol. That way, it is easy to see what an existing reader or writer needs to do in order to support collation.

#### Collation identifiers

Collations can be referred to using collation identifiers. The Delta format does not specify any collation rules other than binary collation, but supports the concept of collation providers such that engines can use providers like [ICU](https://icu.unicode.org/) and mark statistics accordingly.

A collation identifier consists of 3 parts, which are combined into one identifier using dots as separators. Dots are not allowed to be part of provider and collation names, but can be used in versions.

Part | Description
-|-
Provider | Name of the provider. Must not contain dots
Name | Name of the collation as provided by the provider. Must not contain dots

> Version | Version string. Is allowed to contain dots. This part is optional.

Reviewer 3: can you give an example of how the version can be used?

### Primitive Types

Type Name | Description
-|-
string| UTF-8 encoded string of characters. A collation can be specified in [Column Metadata](#specifying-collations-in-the-table-schema), otherwise binary collation is used as the default.

> ***Add new rows to the [Column Metadata](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#column-metadata) table.***

Field Name | Description
-|-
__COLLATIONS | Collations for strings stored in the field or combinations of maps and arrays that are stored in this field and do not have nested structs. Refer to [Specifying collations in the table schema](#specifying-collations-in-the-table-schema) for more details.

> ***Edit the [Per-file Statistics](https://github.com/delta-io/delta/blob/master/PROTOCOL.md#per-file-statistics) section and change it from the "Per-column statistics" section onwards.***

Per-column statistics record information for each column in the file and they are encoded, mirroring the schema of the actual data.
For example, given the following data schema:
```
|-- a: struct
|    |-- b: struct
|    |    |-- c: long
|-- d: struct
     |-- e: string collate ICU.en_US.72
```

> Statistics could be stored with the following schema:

Reviewer 3: Can the stats collection be optional for writers? For example a writer that doesn't understand collations or has no support for a particular collation, can write the regular stats and ignore the collation stats?
